It seems the number of educated unemployed
youth in West Bengal is over a million!
I don't know how many illiterate
unemployed there are.
Most of Bengal's problems have arisen from
this one big problem namely, unemployment.
I'm not one of these unemployed.
I've been working for a foreign
company for the last ten years.
It's called 'Hindustan Peters',
liability of members limited.
We're in the field of providing
light and wind.
Peters' lamps and fans are
renowned in the market.
1 200 workers are employed
in our factory in the city.
We've started exporting fans.
This ceiling fan will go to Iraq.
An order for 10,000 fans..
..will be sold for
Rs.1 million 200 thousand.
I've no mean responsibility
in this matter.
Because I'm the Sales Manager of
the Fan division of Hindustan Peters.
My name is Shyamalendu Chatterji.
I spent my childhood in Patna.
My father was a school
teacher in Patna.
We did our schooling in Patna.
I was a good student. I did my Masters
in English and stood first!
After finishing my education
I followed in my father's..
..footsteps and taught
for a few days.
Then I saw an advertisement in the
'First Light' for a job and applied.
I got a call after a few days.
I was interviewed
at the Peters' office in Patna.
Hello, Mr. Chatterji!
The manager, Mr. Davidson, asked me
several questions for half an hour.
I had no problem answering him.
A few days later, the postman handed
me a letter bearing the Peters' mark.
I had the job! Starting
salary was Rs.800.
There was a month and a half
before I joined the company.
In this interim, I completed
a necessary duty.
The girl was called Dolan Chapa.
I had studied Shakespeare from her father
Professor Bhattacharji in college.
My first posting after
marriage was at Delhi.
We left for Delhi from Patna
on 25th February 1 960.
From that time, till today,
the 5th of March, 1 970..
.. I've progressed
so far in ten years.
The secret of my success lies
in my intelligence..
..luck and my hard work.
I've been successful in connecting
my company's future with mine.
My concentration, intelligence
and thinking is all centered..
..around Hindustan Peters.
We've been in Kolkata
since the last seven years.
Initially, we lived in
a flat at Ballygunje.
The company has gifted us a
residence after I became..
..the Sales Manager.
My father has come along with my
mother to Kolkata after his retirement.
I've arranged for a flat for them.
We've a seven-year-old son.
We call him Raja.
I've put Raja in
St. Paul's school at Darjeeling.
He lives as a boarder there.
We visit him during the holidays.
We've 180 employees
at our head-office.
Our M.D., the managing director,
is Mr. Andrew Ferris.
He was a student of Belian
College of Oxford.
The Marketing Director,
Mr. Davidson is his subordinate.
So, is the Finance Director, Gordon.
Davidson is abroad at the moment.
I hear he has cancer.
Immediately below them in
hierarchy are two people..
..who are looking
up with great hope.
One of them is the lamps
division sales manager..
..Ronodeb, alias Runu Sanyal.
The other is the fans division
sales manager..
..Shyamalendu Chatterji. That is me.
Thank you!
So Mr. Talukdar, what's up?
Standing next to you, I feel..
Why do you feel like this?
Your father is very tall, right?
- No.
Then?
- Mother.
Oh, mother!
Good morning!
- Good morning, Mr. Chatterji.
Are you done?
Yes, it's the last page.
Take your time.
Greetings, sir!
Why is the fan on?
I didn't put it on,
I only dusted the place.
You didn't put it on?
- No, sir.
This place was quite dirty,
you polished it clean.
If you put on the fan unnecessarily,
the boss will cut your salary.
Yes please.
My home phone is on the blink,
please put in a complaint.
Certainly.
Why were you surprised to see me?
You had asked me to come early.
I wasn't surprised with you
but with your sense of duty.
I see.
Good morning, Mr. Chatterji!
- Good morning!
What can I do for you?
Change your hairstyle for one thing.
I like the last one better.
I'll think about it.
Is the M.D. in?
You want to see Mr. Ferris?
This is very urgent.
- All right.
Good morning!
- Good morning!
I was coming to see you.
- Come.
The projection is at ten?
- Yes, at Roxy.
We'll need around
ten minutes to get there.
My only regret, we couldn't
get an Iraqi lady.
Are you displeased? I think
she is rather attractive.
It's not that. It's a question
of authenticity. Come.
Is this advertisement on?
- Yes, it's all confirmed.
That's one minute, is it?
Roughly, 100 feet.
Do you find it long?
Thank you.
I felt it ended abruptly.
That's the desired effect you see.
The impact, it has to be snappy!
- Agreed.
I rather like that..
You know..
Yes, quite clever. Effective.
By the way, you haven't met
Mr. Anand, the producer of the film.
How are you?
Good morning!
- Good morning!
When did you return?
A minute back, sit.
Cigarette?
What's up?
What do I say?
You're the happening people!
Meaning?
- I'm right, you know.
You may say that.
But no slogan on any street says so.
I'm not speaking in general,
in the Peters' context you're king!
I'm glad you used the plural.
There is a board meeting today,
you know.
Yes, okay.
I had sent you a note in the morning.
Why, did I err?
Stay alert, you may be sent for.
Oh, no, hope they
won't ask me anything.
Don't make me laugh, Mr. Chatterji.
No, sir. I know the people here,
it's the other directors I fear.
I've never faced them earlier.
All this time it was Davidson.
He left, that is why
we're in the reckoning.
What will the other director do?
Who knows? He may ask weird questions.
I'll tell you what he'll do.
Sir Boren will sleep most of the time.
Kumar Jagdish will raise
his arm if needed. Never speaks.
Moorty is from Delhi, you know that.
Our solicitor is one.
But you've all the biggies in hand.
Why fear the small timers?
I don't know.
I get this mixed feeling.
It's nothing.
You're quite pleased with yourself.
You're just acting.
You're quite lucky, I don't
think you'll be in this room for long.
Sir, we've reached Peters.
Sir, we've reached.
Good morning!
- Good morning, Mr. Chatterji.
Are they all here? Who's it?
Only Mr. Boren. They'll be here soon.
Good morning, good morning, Chatterji!
How are you? How are you, my dear?
Fine, thank you!
Nilamber, nice to see you, my boy!
Good morning, sir. How are you?
Me? Fit as a fiddle
and right as the rain.
God asks when am I leaving.
I'm attending meetings!
I turned 70 in February.
Sir, you're like your old Rolls Royce.
The older it gets, the dearer it gets.
I've had to fight for my due,
all my life I've fought, Nilamber.
An African fighter and an
English fighter are not equals.
They've had it up to
their noses taking care of..
..the ministers and politicians.
In our times,
they had everyone under their thumb.
If necessary they put us in jails!
That is why I've always
treated the British well.
Good morning, everybody!
Good morning, nice to see you, my boy!
Good morning!
- Good morning!
Oh, when did you arrive?
Last night, 1:30.
1:30? Then you travelled from Palam.
Oh, how dismal really.
That's how it is.
I thought it was engineered
by the engineers.
Kept us waiting for four hours!
So well, where are we?
Are you coming?
In a minute, dear boy.
Now, I remember, did I tell
you about the time with Ashim?
I think Chatterji hasn't heard.
Chatterji! Did I tell you that story?
No, I don't think so.
The war was on full spring, you know.
Amidst that I had delayed a
Field Marshall's bill for three days!
I sent such a note that
the bill would almost be rejected.
Morning!
How are you?
- Fine thank you! - Morning!
I hope you don't mind
if I go back after a while?
Because I've just started
telling them a story which..
..I haven't finished yet!
Don't worry about it!
Sure!
So that was a really big thing!
It was really big, you know!
It went all the way up to the Viceroy!
Finally, on the Finance
Secretary's request and..
..considering the war
effort I softened my stance.
Come home some day,
I'll tell you the entire episode!
You'll be amazed!
Look at their greatness!
Despite that incident they..
..gave me the knighthood!
How could they not
give it to you, sir?
I'll join you too.
Please send for the coffee.
- Certainly.
Don't run away!
- No.
Good morning!
Good morning, sir!
- Good morning!
What's the matter?
See, I'm going through exactly
the same condition as you are!
I had sent a note yesterday.
They said I might be sent for today.
I see.
Want one?
No, thank you!
I'll stick to my simple ones!
Did you see the papers today?
- Cancer?
I hear they'll ban cigarette ads.
- Why?
It's a gone case really.
They don't stop them manufacturing it.
Have I seen that earlier?
- This?
Ramalingam.
I see.
Ramalingam? So,
he is distributing rings these days!
No. He said you're going
through a bad phase. Wear it.
I told my wife.
She brought it the very next day.
Excuse me, you're not needed.
You may go now.
Thank you.
Excuse me, can you please check
if my residence line is working?
Please connect me to my residence.
Not repaired yet? Okay, leave it.
See, they didn't call just me.
They had sent for Chatterji too.
Really? Then?
What else? We waited in
the waiting room and returned.
Didn't they call you in?
They'll call only if needed.
How disappointing!
Chikita, Chikita!
Good evening, sir!
Are you back?
When was the phone repaired?
Just a while back.
Dearest Dad and Mum, I'm fine.
I had a slight cold.
I'm fine now.
My exams begin from Monday..
..that's why I'm studying very hard.
But I skate and play cricket too.
Narinder's ankle broke while
trying to skate, but mine didn't.
It's very misty here.
I like the mist but not the rain.
The rain in Kolkata is nice.
I'm looking forward to
your visit and miss you a lot.
Do write. Love and kisses from Raja.
Did you read the letter?
- Raja's?
Not Raja's.
Your sister-in-law's, she's coming.
Who, Tutul?
- Yes.
I was getting the guest room ready.
When is she coming?
- Tomorrow morning.
The Delhi Express,
it comes in between 8 and 8:30.
Tomorrow morning?
It's not her fault, poor thing.
She posted the letter on the first
and it got here today, on the fifth.
It's Saturday tomorrow.
Hope you don't have to go to work.
I've to drop in for a bit.
I'm so happy!
She had come way back in 1961.
She hasn't seen our flat.
- Jolly good!
I was sad reading Raja's letter.
- Why?
I felt like getting
him here right away.
What are you saying?!
If you had put him in a school here..
..you wouldn't be so relaxed,
neither would he have studied so well.
Listen, please drop me.
We've to leave at the same time.
What is that boy's name?
Your aunt Tuku's sister-in-law's son.
He works for Getsons.
Who? Prakash?
How about asking him tomorrow?
Why bother him?
Well, he would meet Tutul.
You're mad!
- Why?
He is a nice boy.
What's the guarantee that your sister
hasn't fallen for someone already?
Never!
How do you know?
Mum would've written about it.
Do mothers know everything
all the time these days?
If nature has taken it's course..
..by now your sister must be
a most attractive lady.
That is why I was saying.
Wait, what's the hurry?
She won't leave immediately.
How long will she stay?
- She said for about 15 days.
Who could it be at this hour?
Whoever it is, please don't
make him sit for too long.
What's up, Shushanto?
Greetings!
Sit, I'll be back in a minute.
Who is it?
- Shushanto.
We're leaving now..
In that case, I'll..
Oh, no, please sit.
Now that you're here, sit for a bit.
What's up?
Mum sent this.
- What's that?
Sir, it's nothing.
- There was no need you know.
I got the job because of you.
How do you like your job?
- Good.
Have you made friends with everyone?
- Yes.
Any problems at the factory?
No problems as such, sir, but..
But?
The problem at the
canteen about the fish.
You mean they served bad fish?
Does it stink?
Not really.
We settled the problem in the evening.
Okay, if you've any problem,
do let me know.
Okay, bye!
- Bye!
Anil, we're going out,
we'll be returning late.
If someone calls tell them about it.
What do you think?
Seems like a dream.
- A nightmare?
No. But it has changed
so much in six years.
More than you?
He couldn't recognise you, you know.
Did he know me earlier?
Tutul, tell me about Patna.
I haven't been there since 1965.
Your office is still there.
The one you gave your interview at.
It would be. If it had
closed down I'd have heard of it.
Do you know whisky died?
- Whisky?
You haven't seen him.
He was our dog. Sydney silky.
He was so cute.
Poor thing!
What was the matter with him?
Hepatitis.
He was just three years old.
He was ill for three days and died.
I've been telling you
to keep a dog for since long.
Why? Mrs.
Ferris did say she'd give you a dog.
That will be when
her dog gives a litter.
Should I wait till then?
I wonder how you were
allowed to come to Kolkata!
Meaning?
Nobody wants to come here nowadays.
I wanted to come.
- I can see that.
I was wondering how
your parents allowed it.
They thought since you're here,
there is nothing to worry.
When you look at the streets
can you imagine that so..
..many people die here regularly?
Do you know any of those people?
The dying ones?
No, the ones who are killing them.
You're mad! How will he know them?
Do you? Tell me!
Have you come to meet
the revolutionaries in Kolkata?
There is a non-revolutionary.
I'll study him.
That's not your task.
You need serious insights for that.
You forget I've studied psychology..
..and many other things.
Fortunately, there is no
way of knowing that looking at you.
Keep this in the guest room.
I'll be with you in a minute.
Peter's lamp! Peter's fan!
Did you make it?
Made in my factory. I sell them!
I've been waiting so long
to show you this flat. Nice isn't it?
Come, take a look.
Wow, it's wonderful!
You can hear gunfire at night,
you know.
Of course,
it's hard to tell which is gunfire..
..and which is the
sound of bombs going off.
It seems so peaceful now.
That's because it's the eighth floor.
I was worried about getting
a flat on the lower floors.
The higher floors are better.
There is less dust,
dirt, mosquitoes and flies.
Come, I'll show you the house.
You won't get scared sleeping alone?
Whom do I sleep with there, sister?
If you want you can
put on the air conditioning.
Of course, you've the fan too.
No, I prefer the fan.
We too can't sleep
with the windows closed.
I've kept the soap and towel,
you won't need anything.
What is that?
Wait, I'll show you.
You switch this on,
that light comes on.
If you open the tap after
a few minutes, you'll get hot water.
It won't blast I hope.
- No, silly!
Come.
Is this room vacant?
Mostly. His friend
from Dhanbad had come over.
He stayed here for a few days.
What about your in-laws?
He has brought a flat for
them at Sanand road at Ballygunje.
They stay there.
- Why? Why don't they live here?
Don't even ask. These officers
working with foreign firms..
..have so many rules to follow.
They don't let them stay permanently.
He said he'd fight for it.
Finally father-in-law said
it'll be inconvenient for his son..
..so he'd live separately.
This is unfair!
Why do you've these silly rules?
Hit me, go ahead, hit me.
No really. 12 rooms!
I didn't think you
had made so much progress.
He'll be a director soon.
- When?
Not sure yet. But when it happens,
it'll be a better flat!
May be they won't
allow me to stay too!
No way. They can't stop
the sister-in-law from staying.
See you.
- Where are you going?
Where else? To the office.
Even though he has a holiday
on Saturdays, he has to go to office.
I'll pick you up at a quarter to 1.
We'll have lunch at the club.
I've to do my hair today.
All right.
I'll drop you at Eve's after lunch.
Once I go to the racecourse,
I'll send you the car.
Meet us once you're
done with your hairdresser.
Race? Meaning?
As if you don't know
the races happen on Saturdays.
You go to the races?!
If you don't see that,
your study will be incomplete.
You actually bet at the races?!
You too will bet.
But that sari won't do.
Is it a bad sari?
Not worthy of you.
How can I wear a better sari
travelling by third class sleeper!
You don't need to worry about that.
There is no dearth of saris here.
That's my responsibility.
All right, bye-bye!
Come.
Sit, let's talk!
The others have been clicked
three-four years earlier.
You brought it. Wait.
Sit.
Sister, you live in great comfort,
isn't it?
You will too.
You'll also get all these comforts.
Your husband must
be getting a good salary!
Once he is the director
he'll get 120,000.
Annual salary! Did you think
it would be his monthly salary?
But he has a rival
in the lamps department.
There is tremendous
competition between the two.
120,000!
He is quite popular in the office.
He has done quite well
in the export department.
Their fans are going to Iran
and Egypt and to many other places.
Rabindranath Tagore
got the Nobel Prize.
He had to work quite hard for that.
Plus he has to travel.
He returned from the Middle
East just the other day.
He is never here for
more than 20 days a month.
I don't understand what he does,
I don't even ask.
What do you do the whole day?
This, that and the other.
I cook new dishes from cook books.
I knit, make things for my son.
Sometimes, I go and catch up on the news.
- With whom?
There are many people in the office.
Their wives are in
the same boat as me.
Once I thought of sitting
for my Bachelor exams privately.
Why didn't you?
I've grown out of
the habit of studying.
I don't feel like reading
anything besides magazines.
To tell you the truth,
I think of only one thing these days.
When will he become a director?
Of course, I worry about Raja too.
I'm sure it must be nice
to get whatever you want.
There is a nice, suitable boy for you.
He works for the government.
Want to meet him?
You'll teach like father, right?
Or will you work?
I haven't decided anything yet.
I had no idea there was
a place like this in Kolkata.
I like this club,
the others are so gloomy.
You wouldn't have gotten
entry here ten years back.
Was it only for the British?
- Exclusive!
You mean there is no difference
in the British and Indians now?
Differences due to the
skin colour will always remain.
But differences in privileges
have lessened considerably.
Is that good or bad?
You ask the weirdest of questions.
Why? I'm just asking.
Does your brother
Shyamal know everything?
He surely knows better than me!
He holds a big post at work!
It's not a question of good or bad.
The thing is that an artificial
barrier has been removed.
That's all. Now, each one will find
his own space according to his station.
What do you mean?
Station, meaning position, ability.
Ability to do what?
Tutul!
Oh, no!
How are you? Good morning!
Good morning!
- Good morning!
Good morning! Hope you're fine, dear?
Let me introduce you. Sir Boren Roy.
My sister-in-law, Sudarshana.
Sudarshana, Sudarshana!
How appropriate!
She has come from Patna today.
You've come today?! How sensible!
Darling, you'll stay
for a few days, right?
I may be 70 years old,
but I still have sharp eyes!
Or else why would I zero
in on your table from a distance.
Have a good day!
Who is he?
- Oh, a big shot!
Sir Boren Roy.
He is one of the directors
of their company.
He is quite scary, isn't it?
He is quite harmless really.
He is staring at me!
Maybe he likes you.
Unfortunately, you're not the
only woman he stares at like this!
He is still staring at me!
Without blinking!
Now, don't you stare back!
Even if I don't,
I know he is staring at me.
If senior citizens behave like this,
imagine what younger men will go through?
What a director! Will you also
do this once you become a director?
I won't stare at all girls.
That I can guarantee you.
Oh, such a saint!
God knows what he does with his wife!
Is she a beauty?
Come to our office some day.
I'll introduce you.
Oh, no. He won't allow
me to eat in peace.
I'll see you. Do send the car.
I'll just have a look.
Just for a minute.
I'll give you two minutes.
Here is Chrysanthemum!
This is a nice name for a horse!
You don't bet on a horse
because of his name! - I do!
How much will I get if I win?
For Rs.10 you'll get Rs.60.
Is that good or bad?
What do you think?
- It's great.
Well then, it's great.
How will I know which one is my horse?
There, they have numbers.
Your number is six.
Six! My birth date.
Hello!
- Who?
Mr. Ferris. M.D.
A doctor?
Managing Director.
The other person is Mr.
Gordon, Finance Director.
F.D.
- All right, F.D.
Oh, dear! What if I burst a bomb here!
Here we go.
- Where?
There.
What happened?
- It's over.
And mine?
Second, no. 3 is first.
I'll bet again.
One moment.
Look at your sister-in-law!
What happened? You're tongue-tied!
Hope I married the right sister!
I've my doubts now.
If so, divorce me.
Divorce? You need grounds for that.
Fine. I'll look for reasons.
How about mental cruelty?
That will save my skin.
Wonderful conversation.
I've thought about it.
You've to have sherry today.
Not at all.
Why? Your sister can have it,
why can't you?
As if I'm the only one who drinks.
I'm not a sales manager's wife.
I'll sit here and watch.
- And study?
I've heard you drink a lot.
Oh. You seem to have sung paeans
of my qualities to your sister.
I only told her the truth.
I'll see you drunk.
I don't touch drinks except at home.
No it's not that.
The gentleman hadn't
seen the lady before that.
Just took one look at the lady.
Then he said..
Thank you!
Then he said you're ill.
And he described the
symptoms of epilepsy.
Then the lady said, right, it matches.
The gentleman said,
oh, it's fine. Then..
Meaning?
What was it?
- A locket.
It was in his hands?
A gold locket. Not an ordinary one.
And not just any locket you know.
The gentleman's picture
on one face and his guru's..
..picture on the other face.
Then?
The gentleman said, put this on.
You won't get any more fits.
And I noticed for a fact that after
that, the lady didn't have any fits.
Did you see it up close?
Not just him, I saw it too.
It was quite big and heavy.
It's not just one or two cases. There
are thousands of cases like this.
It certainly makes you think.
So, now you're his follower, Ronu?
I don't know about that.
I'm telling you what I saw.
If he is so capable,
let him cure our city of all ills.
What are you saying, Dolon?
A mendicant and cure our city!
This chap seems hardly human.
He sounds more like a god!
So what if he does.
This city is doomed!
That means there is no way out?
There is. Give the boys employment.
Where will you get so many vacancies?
What's the use even
if you give them jobs?
They'll form unions.
And then you deal with that.
But is it only about jobs?
They're saying the
whole system is rotten.
I don't think they want jobs.
They want revolution.
We need a dictator.
Our young men don't trust anything.
Samar, it's a universal thing.
Universal, my foot!
They are doing it abroad.
And we follow them.
They do it, we do it too.
We haven't stopped aping them
25 years after independence!
They don't understand
independence the way we do.
This is the
post-independence generation.
I hope you're not
trying to defend them.
That's a generation gap,
you won't understand that.
I do, I most certainly do!
Mullick, why are you so quiet?
How about some witticisms?
You've a lot of experience with
the labour class. Let us hear some.
You all know I'm an admirer of beauty.
You've made me sit in front
of someone who has me tongue-tied.
Is this admiration or something else?
You can't admire sitting on the sofa.
Sit on the floor, at her feet.
Yes, that is your seat.
Certainly! Certainly, with pleasure!
Would you like a sherry?
I don't need it.
Sir, mother and father
have come from Ballygunje.
Don't you have a man
in the elevator here?
No, the lift is..
Bless you, my dear.
I looked here and there and wondered.
You had mentioned the eighth floor,
so I pressed eight.
Did you come in the express lift?
When I saw a Madrasi
name on your door..
Come. Come, Mother.
Come.
Sit, Mother.
There are so many guests here.
So what, please sit!
I've been meaning
to come for many days.
They're my friends.
My sister has come
from Patna today. Tutul.
Is that right?
I'm sorry.
Bless you, dear.
- She has passed her Masters this year.
You go, I'll sit here.
Please have some sweets and go.
Don't worry, dear. It's okay.
You've grown up, dear!
Mother talks a lot about you.
So many memories,
I sit and think back of those days.
My sister-in-law bet at the
races for the first time today.
She won Rs. 19.
Beginners' luck.
Good morning!
How about some tea?
If you have some.
Anil.
- Yes sir.
Two cups of tea.
Are you an early riser?
I was awake, I didn't have a watch.
So I got up.
Just a minute.
This is my watch.
I had given it to your sister.
She doesn't use it.
Return it to me when you leave,
that'll be fine.
Thank you!
Is there something strange here?
- Why?
You must be thinking,
Shyamal's life is so facile.
I don't come to conclusions so easily.
Let me observe some more.
When I was in school,
we had a few subjects.
Like geography.
I disliked it immensely.
But I couldn't avoid those because
they were a part of the syllabus.
You're saying you still
have to do things you don't like.
Right?
Else, one stagnates.
There is no promotion. Is that good?
Fine. When you go for parties,
I'll arrange your books.
They're very untidy.
As long as you're here..
..we won't go to a party
unless it's absolutely important.
You disappointed me yesterday.
- Why?
You were a martyr.
Not everyone is a martyr.
You don't drink so much.
You should know there
is something called conflict.
I can't argue with a rival like you.
Why? Can you drink a lot?
A lot of your qualities
got left behind in Patna.
Your moustache has gone,
your glasses have changed.
Many other things have changed.
That's all?
- That's all.
Is that good or bad?
You are keeping mum.
Hasn't sister gotten up?
She doesn't get up before 9.
And you?
Do you rise so early on Sundays too?
Earlier than this. I play golf.
- Golf?
Golf.
That too is geography.
You didn't go today.
I feel like listening to the Sitar
( stringed instrument) and clarinet today.
What are we doing today?
Anything you wish.
I'll show you something.
- What?
Let's get there first.
You'll have to get out of the car.
If you don't mind.
Do we've to get off?
What's this?
Is this the way your fans work?
Good morning, Mr. Ramalingam!
Good morning, Mr. Chatterji!
How come you're so late today?
I'm getting old, so I take
a little longer on my feet. - Come.
What about the compassion that
you're showing toward all colleagues?
What are you saying?
How about giving me a ring?
He first wore it.
How did he do it so fast?
His wife did it.
True. Do you need a ring, Mr.
Chatterji?
A star sapphire will suit you now?
- Really?
Yes!
Chatterji, I'll be retiring
after six months. - I know.
After you leave the salary
department we will really miss you.
Before I go, I've got something
very precious to show you.
Have you got it with you?
- Yes.
Please sit.
This is my father's letter.
It's written in 1932,
when I first joined this firm.
The English language is like fire.
Oh dear, this is in Tamil.
The English are like fire.
- Like fire? Very well.
If you're too far away you
won't get the warmth of the fire.
What does that mean?
If you're too far away you
won't get the warmth of the fire.
Won't get it?
- Right.
Listen. If you are..
too near you'll get scorched.
You mean?
- If you're too near..
You'll get singed!
Oh, you mean one will get scorched?
- Yes.
So one shouldn't
go too far or too near.
One should be at a medium distance.
That's right, that's right!
Have I gone too close or what?
Have I been singed?
How do I tell you, Mr. Chatterji?
What has to happen can't be uttered,
you've to feel it.
You mean in my heart?
You're very ambitious, Mr.
Chatterji, very ambitious.
Mr. Ramalingam,
one can't move ahead without that.
I'm not saying ambition is a bad thing.
- Thank God!
I thought my entire
life has been a sham.
All ambitions are awful
except those which climb upwards..
..on the miseries and
credibility of mankind.
Joseph Conrad.
Have you read it, Mr. Chatterji?
Mr. Ramalingam,
you're a very learned man.
That is why I'm nothing! I only have a
great stock of other people's wisdom.
My feud bourgeois.
Sen here.
Is there a problem at Park Street?
- Problem?
Yes. There is no coordination
in the funny animation.
It's ridiculous.
I see. I'll arrange to have it repaired.
- Please.
Good morning!
- Good morning!
How was your weekend?
- Good.
Will your husband allow
you to work after marriage?
Or I'll have problems.
I'll tell him.
- Is that a promise?
All right.
Chatterji. What! What are you saying?
The goods have to be
shipped out in a week and..
Didn't anyone notice
it all these days? No.
Sen.
That document won't be out.
- Which one?
Export act.
Please hold it. Send them a telex,
call them anything. Do something.
Please.
Ms. D'souza would you connect
me to Mr. Ferris please.
I'd like to speak to him.
Mr. Ferris, Mr.
Chatterji would like to see you.
Go in please.
Good morning, Mr. Ferris.
Good morning, Chatterji, come on in.
Gordon.
Right away, Andrew.
What is the matter?
It's 1:30, he has never done this.
Can't you call him?
I'm feeling quite hungry.
Ask that gentleman
if we can make a call.
Could I use your telephone please?
- Yes ma'am, this way.
Chatterji.
You're still in the office?!
Oh no! I'm extremely sorry.
I'm tied up with
something important here.
So you aren't coming?
I simply can't.
I'm hopelessly tied up.
Poor Tutul,
she has been waiting for so long.
Tell Tutul this won't
ever happen again.
We'll go ahead and eat then.
- Please.
After this, we're going for a movie.
We're just the two of us.
No need to send the car.
We'll take a taxi.
- All right.
He can't come. He is tied
up with something important.
Let's eat.
Is madam back yet?
- No, sir.
Oh, good, you're back.
You know what happened to us?
We didn't get the tickets.
What did we do then?
We went to the market.
Then we went to Schillers.
Then we went to Cottage Industries.
We had tea at Trinka's.
It took us half an hour to get a taxi.
It's so hot. I'll have a shower and come.
- Okay.
Tutul, won't you have a shower?
Yes, I'll.
If you knew the actual reason,
you wouldn't be so upset.
Tell me the reason. Explain it to me.
It's not possible right now.
Tell me, professor.
What's today's date?
Eighth.
- Eighth?
On the 15th, we have to send
a huge consignment of fans to Iraq.
It's big money.
It's very prestigious too.
The factory informed me today,
there is a defect in the fans.
What defect?
You see that cover at the bottom?
The paint on it hasn't spread evenly.
There are wrinkles on it.
If we send the fans
in this condition..
..the entire consignment
will be rejected and returned.
Can't it be rectified?
It can be.
But it'll take a lot of time.
At least three weeks.
As a result, number one,
we've to pay a heavy penalty.
Number two, we won't have any
prestige left in the export market.
Number three.
I'm the manager of the fans division.
This entire export consignment
was my responsibility.
Understand?
I see. You had reason to worry.
So, it's not my fault.
It's yours. Isn't it?
Agreed. But is there no way out?
There is. Imagine if there
is a terrible earthquake or..
..an epidemic or a flood.
Ones that are called
'acts of God' in this context.
Acts of God? That's strange!
But will God act for you?
I don't think so.
If there was some
problem at the factory?
If work came to a halt,
we would've got some time.
I would have got some respite.
Then start a problem!
You can do anything.
Sorry, sorry!
What do you think
of your brother Shyamal?
I've erred. Forgive me.
But when there is a way,
why do you think so much?
I'm not thinking now.
I see.
What are you doing?
Correct! I forgot to tell you..
..we don't need to look for
a suitable boy for your sister-in-law.
Meaning?
- Should I tell?
Tell him.
She has a boyfriend in Patna.
She got a ten-page letter today!
I probed and found out everything.
He was a year senior to
her in college, he is a Boddi.
He isn't working yet.
Didn't I tell you!
I'm the only one
giving all explanations.
You won't tell me a thing?
What do you want to know?
At least tell me about the boy.
Intellectual? Intelligent?
You could say that.
Revolutionary?
- Sort of.
The future is dark.
I wouldn't call it dark.
It's uncertain.
Is that good or bad?
I don't know.
First love?
- Whose?
Yours.
A personal question.
The other day that boy got
some sweets we haven't eaten them.
It's made of fresh jaggery, want some?
How about you?
I protest. I should've
been told about this earlier.
You're too much!
Should she come and tell you as soon as
she arrives that she has a boyfriend.
What are you looking for?
My glasses.
Good night!
What happened at your office?
What is the problem?
That export matter.
Hope it's not too serious.
- No.
Tutul has made such a blunder.
She doesn't listen to me.
You talk to her.
If she gets too involved with just
about anybody, she'll be in a problem.
Hello!
- Mr. Talukdar?
Yes.
- I'm Chatterji speaking.
What's up?
Did I wake you up?
Oh no, the night's still young!
I had some work with you.
- Is it urgent?
Or why would I call at this time?
Should I come over?
- What if I do?
That'll be my good fortune!
Fine, give me ten minutes.
I had a marriage invitation today.
I returned just ten
minutes before your call.
Of course,
I never sleep before midnight.
What is it?
How is the factory doing?
Factory? You mean your factory?
- Naturally.
It's fine!
Wasn't there a problem three days ago?
- No.
I thought there was
some problem at the canteen.
That was a trivial matter!
It seems the fish pieces were small!
That was solved in half an hour.
So, there is no tension right now?
Not that I know of.
Of course,
God alone knows what goes on inside!
What's the matter?
You seem a bit out of sorts.
Do you want tension?
Haven't you heard of the export crisis?
- Crisis?
Goods are ready.
The goods aren't going.
They're defective.
There was a problem with the dye.
That is why there are
wrinkles in the surface.
It can be seen from
a distance of three feet!
The whole thing makes
me absolutely sick.
The goods are supposed
to be shipped on the 15th.
There is a penalty clause.
The party won't extend the L.C.
Oh, father!
It's really a distressing matter!
The account books will show red,
brother.
I don't recall Peter's company
facing a situation like this ever.
There is a way.
- You think so?
But that's not in my sphere.
I mean, I'm not used
to walking that path.
Then whose area is it? Mine?
Actually, you've more
experience in this matter.
Plus, you've a certain
connection with the factory.
Hope you don't mind.
There is no scope to mind,
I don't understand anything.
Don't get it?
No. Please tell me a little
more clearly, just a bit more.
If the factory shuts down
due to unseen circumstances..
..I won't have to give
any penalty or explanations.
I'll get some time in hand
and will manage the matter.
Got it?
Mister, all along we envied
you your height, your smile..
..and your sharp personality.
But that you possess
this quality too..
Mr. Talukdar, let's face it!
Both of us know that there
is no way other than this.
I get it, Mr. Chatterji.
Only you don't understand one thing.
I've been through a lot.
All for this Peter's company.
But no one ever bothered
about my compensation.
Listen..
- What is there to listen?
I've been working for 23 years.
Now, I may be a personnel officer,
but for 1 3 years, I was a labour officer.
I'm tired of listening.
Whatever that is, listen to me.
What is being done will continue.
It'll be done with the M.D's consent.
I'll tell him that you helped me.
Exactly! I'm helping you!
But you've to tell him how much
I've helped you.
Not just tell him but
he also must realise it!
It needs to be appreciated.
I guarantee you..
..first thing in the morning,
I'll meet the Managing Director.
I'll tell him I see a
way and we want to apply it.
If it works, fine, or forget it.
There is no reason for it not to work,
especially because..
..this history has
been found three days back.
Today is the eighth, tomorrow..
..the ninth, Tuesday.
By the 15th, you've to..
Are you relying on the canteen affair?
We need a starting point.
We've very little time.
Yes. I too will get to
work first thing in the morning.
But one thing,
I can't accept your compliment.
Just like you don't walk this path..
..I too don't walk this path, Mr.
Chatterji.
There are other people
for this. Get it?
See this hand?
It has always stayed clean!
Good morning, Mr.
Chatterji, come on in.
Mr. Ferris, I think I've
found a way to save the situation.
You do, do you?
Sit down, sit down. Tell me about it.
The cover is open.
"If you want a good
fan buy Peter's fan."
"Let the wonderful breeze
freshen you up entirely."
"Buy Peter's fan!"
"A good fan, the best fan.
Buy Peter's fan."
"Cool, cool breeze
lets you relax completely."
"Buy Peter's fan!"
Number so and so, dated so and so.
I was delighted to note..
..that your clients have expressed
satisfaction with our ceiling fans.
With kind regards to Mrs.
Siddique and yourself.
Yours etcetera.
Are you feeling unwell?
No. I'm okay, just a slight headache.
I've an Aspro, should I give you?
I won't need it, thank you!
Tell me.
- What?
You ask me what?
Its fine, it's fine.
It's nerve racking.
It's nothing, mister, nothing!
You aren't used to it so
you feel bad about it.
All this is part of the game.
We had no other way out.
Was there?
You got your finger
on the pulse all right.
Besides,
this is common practice, mister.
What you're doing is
not unjust or unnatural.
But if you slip up,
the cat will be out of the bag.
What do you mean?
If we don't cover all fronts
how will the strategy work!
Your job now is to simply keep going.
No compromise.
Production must go on.
The company won't tolerate
any misbehaviour. That's all!
Now, the matter will go to the High
Court before the impasse is broken.
Go medium, go slow, production stop.
Charge sheet.
A couple of bombs.
- Bomb?
You want police action, right?
Your deadline is the 15th.
You need a reason for the lock out.
There are chances that
the machinery might be damaged.
You can't do without
a situation like this.
After that you'll of course negotiate.
You can make one or
two concessions that time.
This way, the problem is solved.
After all, the onus is on you.
On us!
Excuse me!
- Now what!
Can I relax?
- 500%
Want more? No.
Oh, sorry.
Ask her to come.
Welcome to Hindustan Peters.
You probably didn't
think I'd really come.
You've some time in hand, right?
- Half an hour.
Sister is waiting at Mahadev's shop.
I'm leaving.
- Good night!
Oh, let me introduce you.
Ms. Pavit, my secretary.
Ms. Bhattacharji, my wife's sister.
Good night!
- Good night! Good night!
Do you like her?
As long as you like it.
She is getting married soon.
Thank God!
Wait, I'll be back in a minute.
Come, let me show you the real room.
Our directors' meetings are held here.
Only directors?
That means you too attend it?
- So far yes.
Isn't it a good room?
The room is okay.
What is wrong?
I'm trying to figure out
what is it about this room..
..that attracts you so much.
You won't understand that.
Don't even try to understand.
And it can't really be explained.
Actually, I too didn't
have this feeling before.
Then I realised the room
is reaching out to me slowly.
Race jockeys probably feel like that.
When they see the
winning post coming near.
If there is another rival close by..
..you can understand
what kind of tension there is.
It seems quite dangerous
listening to you.
That it is for sure.
You stumble time and again.
You fall on your face.
To the extent that
one makes fouls too.
Suddenly, I thought of
the day when you came to our..
..house in Patna for the first time.
You had worn a brown khadi shirt.
And loose pants.
Your cycle was left leaning
on the Shimul tree by our gate.
Sister looked at you from
the chink in the curtains.
She said, may be he is feeling shy.
Go call him.
You were wearing a frock.
- Sari.
In your honour.
Of course you're not
supposed to know that.
You didn't even look at me that day.
Was that correct?
I would've asked for your hand.
Just think how little
you were that time.
Father used to talk about
you often at the dinner table.
He was so proud of you.
He used to say, I'll never
get such a good student again.
And you listened?
And envied sister.
Don't you do so now?
I had so many apprehensions
before coming to Kolkata this time.
May be I'd find you've
changed into someone horrible.
Very conceited, drinking all night..
As they say in Bengali,
so many more vices.
Why didn't you tell me
about your boyfriend before?
I would've if there
was something worth saying.
Are you speaking the truth?
Why would I lie?
Do you've to leave on the 20th?
- I'll come again.
Give me a job in your office,
I'll come back.
Okay, done.
I hadn't imagined the strike
would catch on so fast and..
..so many people would strike.
The next day, 10th of March,
the workers used a unique..
..way of showing their
protest and anger..
..toward the managers.
On the 11th March I discussed
with Ferris and it was decided..
..that the company wouldn't
tolerate any form of indiscipline.
Reduction of production
was unacceptable.
That day itself, the workers views..
..were displayed on
the factory's outer walls.
And inside the factory,
the worker's began their agitation.
Sign.. News of the trouble
reached the head office.
But no one except Ferris, Talukdar..
..and me knew what
the actual truth was.
Hey, dear! Listen, there is hot news!
What happened?
There is trouble in the fan works!
Trouble, meaning?
Labour trouble.
I hear all work may come to a stop.
Will the blame go to him?
Of course, it will!
He was crowing about the exports.
All goods are ready, they
were to be shipped out in four days.
He'll have to answer now.
Hope your work is not affected.
Are you crazy or what!
My family didn't have an
inkling about the factory news.
Brother Shyamal.
- Yes.
What about the problem at your office?
Is it settled?
Does a crisis go away so easily?
What crisis?
That export matter at work.
Were you able to sleep that night?
You look quite relaxed
since the last few days.
The credit goes to my sister-in-law.
Did he tell you?
He doesn't tell me anything nowadays.
I wouldn't have told her either.
But she was so upset
I had to tell her.
I don't know how much she understood.
I hope you don't think I'm a fool!
What are you saying? Such
problems are common at his office.
There have been no
bad marks against his name.
Touchwood!
On the 12th March,
the factory came to a standstill.
The labour leaders held
a meeting outside one of the..
..gates and expressed their anguish.
Hindustan Peters can't rule!
- Hear, hear!
After discussing with Ferris,
it was decided that the..
..charge-sheets would
be given the next day.
On 13th March,
Saturday, at 10:30 in the morning..
..a bomb went off in our factory.
As a result of which,
one person was injured.
He was our watchman, Tiwari.
I had to visit him at the hospital
in the evening when I heard the news.
On 14th March, Sunday,
our factory was locked at midnight.
There was no need to worry.
We were saved from making huge losses.
Our good name would
stay intact in the market.
On Monday morning
Talukdar came to my room.
What happened? You got injured too?
Or was it while shaving?
Shaving for you, to the M.D.
a splinter.
Tiwari?
- Better.
Better?
He had diabetes! But he is better.
I couldn't sleep for two nights.
- Why?
Why? What if he had died?
How would that affect you?
Aren't people dying
in Kolkata every day?
If he had died,
I would've bought a huge wreath and..
..sent it in your
name complete with a..
..condolence message and all.
I take my hat off to you!
'Kolkata!'
What did you say?
Only Kolkata.
Go and tell them in Patna.
They think we're in danger
each time we step out of our homes.
Do you know what salary
this cabaret dancer gets?
How much?
The famous ones get
a couple of grand you know.
I get the point.
It's a good job.
But your boyfriend won't approve.
Maybe not.
Send us a picture of your
boyfriend when you return to Patna.
By the way,
we do allow honeymooning couples..
..in our guest room.
This point is taken too.
Your rival jockey.
How are you?
Good evening! How are you?
Good evening, Mrs. Chatterji.
Enjoying a lovely evening?
What's up?
Is the lockout indefinite?
No, it'll be settled soon.
What is the union's mood like?
I believe they are slapping two
cases to bring the workers in line.
That is natural.
Is there a problem at your factory?
You didn't tell me anything.
I can fully sympathise
with you in this matter.
You, I mean wives,
get emotional so easily.
I don't know about you,
but if I were to judge..
..from my wife's reactions then..
Really when he told me, I felt so bad.
I called you up immediately.
But you weren't at home.
Don't worry, Anupa.
Things will straighten out. Let's go.
You're really something.
You don't tell us anything!
What is there to say?
Which factory is without
problems nowadays?
I'm not talking about other factories.
If something goes wrong in your
factory won't you tell us at home?
You're all the same.
19th March. The day after
all matters were settled and..
..all papers had been
signed an incident occurred.
Even though I wasn't present there,
I can't deny that in..
..some way I was responsible for it.
A board meeting was called
and after all discussion..
..Mr. Ferris proposed that Mr.
Shyamalendu Chatterji..
..should be appointed as an
additional director of the company.
All those in favour?
Subject to the government's
concurrence etc. etc.
Congratulations! Come.
Mr. Chatterji, congratulations!
- Thank you.
Well done, Chatterji, well done!
Keep it up, my boy, keep it up!
- Mr. Chatterji, congratulations!
Thank you, very much! Thank you!
Thank you so much, Mr. Gordon.
Heartiest congratulations, Mr. Chatterji.
- Thank you!
Very well done, Mr. Chatterji.
Your thoughts are truly brought!
Congratulations, Brother!
- Thanks.
Something is wrong here, you know.
Yes please.
Please connect me to my residence.
- Certainly!
Only congratulating you won't suffice.
I've to thank you too.
Did the M.D. call you?
This has really helped you know.
Amazing! Bye!
- Bye!
Hello! Dolly?
Listen. I'm a director now.
Really? I can't believe it!
Where is Tutul?
Tutul! Tutul!
Tutul, have you heard the news?
What? Thank you!
Your sister was shouting,
my ear is still ringing.
Tell your sister we'll
celebrate outside tonight.
Tell her to decide
where she wants to go.
Listen, I'll get out
in about five minutes.
Okay? I'll hang up.
Tutul, aren't you thrilled? Tell me!
I'm very happy, sister. Very happy.
Kick the ball!
- Pass it here!
Greetings, sir.
Why are you sweating so much?
Don't ask. The lift isn't working.
I had to take the stairs.
Come and sit under the fan.
You don't know what
your sister-in-law is doing.
She was so happy she hugged me tight.
Really? Where is she?
In that room.
We'll eat at home today. I'm cooking.
- Okay.
Anil!
- Yes sir.
A fresh lime with soda.
Tutul!
Sudarshana!
It must've been quite
a party at the office today.
Yes, sure.
What did Ronu say?
What can he say?
Whatever he says,
he must be very jealous from within.